## Introduction

The number of studies employing single-cell RNA-seq has grown rapidly since this technology was introduced [@doi:10.1038/nprot.2017.149].
Unlike its predecessor bulk RNA-seq, which averages the expression profiles of all cells within a sample, single-cell technology quantifies gene expression in individual cells.
Tumors are known to be transcriptionally heterogeneous, which highlights the importance of using single-cell RNA-seq in studying tumor samples [@doi:10.1101/gr.190595.115].
Researchers can use single-cell RNA-seq data of samples obtained from patient tumors to analyze and identify individual cell populations that may play important roles in tumor growth, resistance, and metastasis [@doi:10.1126/science.1254257].
Additionally, single-cell RNA-seq data provides insight into how tumor cells interact with normal cells in the tumor microenvironment [@10.1038/s41588-022-01141-9].

With the growing number of single-cell RNA-seq datasets, efforts have emerged to create centralized data resources.
For example, resources like CELLxGENE [@doi:10.1101/2021.04.05.438318; @doi:10.1101/2023.10.30.563174] offer gene expression data from samples spanning hundreds of cell types in standardized analysis formats.
Other resources offer harmonized data, which allows researchers to perform reliable cross-sample comparisons that leverage many biological contexts to complete their analysis and elucidate previously unknown similarities across samples and disease types.
The Human Cell Atlas (HCA) and Human Tumor Atlas Network (HTAN) are two of many such resources.
The HCA, which aims to use single-cell genomics to provide a comprehensive map of all cell types in the human body [@doi:10.7554/eLife.27041], contains uniformly processed single-cell RNA-seq data obtained from normal tissue with few samples derived from diseased tissue.
The HTAN also hosts a collection of genomic data collected from tumors across multiple cancer types, including single-cell RNA-seq [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.053].

While existing resources have focused on making large quantities of harmonized data from normal tissue or adult tumor samples publicly available, there are considerably fewer efforts to harmonize and distribute data from pediatric tumors.
Pediatric cancer is much less common than adult cancer, so the number of available samples from pediatric tumors is smaller compared to the number of adult tumors [@url:https://www.cancer.gov/types/childhood-cancers/child-adolescent-cancers-fact-sheet#how-do-cancers-in-adolescents-and-young-adults-differ-from-those-in-younger-children] and access to data from pediatric tumors is often limited.
Recently, Xu and colleagues highlighted lack of standardization of pediatric cancer single-cell data as a barrier to reuse [@doi:10.1002/cti2.70033].
Thus, it is imperative to provide harmonized data from pediatric tumors to all pediatric cancer researchers [@doi:10.1186/s13040-018-0190-8].
To address this unmet need, Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation and the Childhood Cancer Data Lab developed and maintain the Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas (ScPCA) Portal (<https://scpca.alexslemonade.org/>), a data resource for single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data of pediatric tumor samples.

The ScPCA Portal holds uniformly processed summarized gene expression from 10x Genomics droplet-based single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq for over 700 samples from a diverse set of 55 types of pediatric cancers.
Originally comprised of data from 10 projects funded by Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation, the Portal has since expanded to include data contributed by pediatric cancer research community members.
In addition to gene expression data from single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq, the Portal includes data obtained from bulk RNA-seq, spatial transcriptomics, and feature barcoding methods such as CITE-seq and cell hashing.
All data on the Portal are available in formats ready for downstream analysis with common workflow ecosystems, such as `SingleCellExperiment` objects used by `R/Bioconductor`[@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0654-x] or `AnnData` objects used by `Scanpy` and related Python modules [@doi:10.1186/s13059-017-1382-0].
Downloaded objects contain both raw and normalized gene expression counts, dimensionality reduction results, and cell type annotations.
As of January 2026, over 900 unique downloaders have accessed the Portal since its launch.

To ensure that all current and future data on the Portal are uniformly processed, we created `scpca-nf`, an open-source Nextflow [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3820] pipeline (<https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf>).
Using a consistent pipeline for all data increases transparency and allows users to perform analysis across multiple samples and projects without having to do any re-processing.
The `scpca-nf` workflow uses `alevin-fry` [@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01408-3] for fast and efficient quantification of single-cell gene expression for all samples on the Portal, including single-cell RNA-seq data and any associated CITE-seq or cell hash data.
The `scpca-nf` pipeline also serves as a resource for the community, allowing others to process their own samples for comparison to samples available on the Portal and submit uniformly processed community contributions to the Portal.

Here, we present the Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas as a freely available resource for all pediatric cancer researchers.
The ScPCA Portal provides downloads ready for immediate use, allowing researchers to skip time-consuming data re-processing and wrangling steps.
We provide comprehensive documentation about data processing and the contents of files on the Portal, including a guide to getting started working with an ScPCA dataset (<https://scpca.readthedocs.io/>).
The ScPCA Portal advances pediatric cancer research by accelerating researchers' ability to answer important biological questions.
