# Results

## The Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas Portal

In March of 2022, the Childhood Cancer Data Lab launched the Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas (ScPCA) Portal to make uniformly processed, summarized single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data and de-identified metadata from pediatric tumor samples openly available for download by the research community.
Data available on the Portal was obtained using two different mechanisms: raw data was accepted from ALSF-funded investigators and processed using our open-source pipeline `scpca-nf`, or investigators processed their raw data using `scpca-nf` and submitted the output for inclusion on the Portal.

All samples on the Portal include a core set of metadata obtained from investigators, including age, sex, diagnosis, subdiagnosis (if applicable), tissue location, and disease stage.
Some samples include additional metadata, such as treatment or tumor stage, if provided by the investigators.
We standardized all provided metadata to maintain consistency across projects before adding it to the Portal.
In addition to providing a human-readable value for the submitted metadata, we also provide ontology term identifiers, if applicable.
Submitted metadata was mapped to associated ontology term identifiers obtained from HsapDv (age) [@url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/hsapdv], PATO (sex) [@doi:10.1093/bib/bbx035; @url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/pato], NCBI taxonomy (organism) [@doi:10.1093/database/baaa062; @url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy], MONDO (disease) [@doi:10.1101/2022.04.13.22273750; @url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/mondo], UBERON (tissue) [@doi:10.1186/2041-1480-5-21; @doi:10.1186/gb-2012-13-1-r5; @url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/uberon], and Hancestro (ethnicity, if applicable) [@doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1396-2; @url:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/hancestro].
These ontology term identifiers offer standardized metadata terms that facilitate comparisons among datasets within the Portal as well as to data from other research projects.

The Portal contains data from over 700 samples and 55 tumor types [@doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2022.04.003; @doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-2517703/v1; @doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-2517758/v1; @doi:10.1038/nature23647; @doi:10.1038/s41467-021-24781-7; @doi:10.1093/neuonc/noad207; @doi:10.1101/2023.12.26.573390].
<!-- TODO: Update numbers -->
Figure {@fig:fig1}A summarizes all samples from patient tumors and patient-derived xenografts currently available on the Portal.
The total number of samples for each diagnosis is shown, along with the proportion of samples from each disease stage within a diagnosis group.
The largest number of samples found on the Portal were obtained from patients with leukemia (n = 216).
The Portal also includes samples from sarcoma and soft tissue tumors (n = 194), brain and central nervous system tumors (n = 167), and a variety of other solid tumors (n = 115).
Most samples were collected at initial diagnosis (n = 520), with a smaller number of samples collected either at recurrence (n = 129), during progressive disease (n = 12), during or after treatment (n = 11), or post-mortem (n = 5).
Along with the patient tumors, the Portal contains a small number of human tumor cell line samples (n = 6).

Each of the available samples contains summarized gene expression data from either single-cell or single-nuclei RNA sequencing.
However, some samples also include additional data, such as CITE-seq quantification of cell-surface protein levels with antibody-derived tags (ADT) [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4380], or hashtag oligonucleotide (HTO) quantification for samples multiplexed prior to sequencing [@doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1603-1].
Out of the 704 samples, 95 have associated CITE-seq data, and 35 have associated multiplexing data.
In some cases, multiple libraries from the same sample were collected for additional assays, either for bulk RNA-seq (n = 182) or spatial transcriptomics (n = 38).
A summary of the number of samples with each additional modality is shown in Figure {@fig:fig1}B, and a detailed summary of the total samples with each sequencing method broken down by project is available in Table S1.

Samples on the Portal are organized by project, where each project is a collection of similar samples from an individual lab.
Users can filter projects based on diagnosis, included modalities (e.g., CITE-seq, bulk RNA-seq), 10x Genomics kit version (e.g., 10Xv2, 10Xv3), and whether or not a project includes samples derived from patient-derived xenografts or cell lines.
The project card displays an abstract, the total number of samples included, a list of diagnoses for all samples included in the Project, and links to any external information associated with the project, such as publications and links to external data, such as SRA or GEO (Figure {@fig:fig1}C).
The project card also indicates the type(s) of sequencing performed, including the 10x Genomics kit version, the suspension type (cell or nucleus), if additional sequencing like bulk RNA-seq is present, or if the samples have been multiplexed using cell hashing.

## Uniform processing of data available on the ScPCA Portal

We developed [`scpca-nf`](https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf), an open-source and efficient Nextflow [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3820] workflow for quantifying single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data and processed all data available on the Portal with it.
Using Nextflow as the backbone for the `scpca-nf` workflow ensures both reproducibility and portability.
All dependencies for the workflow are handled automatically, as each process in the workflow is run in a Docker container.
Nextflow is compatible with various computing environments, including high-performance computing clusters and cloud-based computing, allowing users to run the workflow in their preferred environment.
Setup requires organizing input files and updating a single configuration file for the computing environment after installing Nextflow and either Docker or Singularity.
Nextflow will also handle parallelizing sample processing as allowed by the environment, minimizing run time.
The combination of being able to execute a Nextflow workflow in any environment and run individual processes in Docker containers makes this workflow easily portable for external use.

When building `scpca-nf`, we sought a fast and memory-efficient tool for gene expression quantification to minimize processing costs.
We expected many users of the Portal to have their own single-cell or single-nuclei data processed with Cell Ranger [@doi:10.1038/ncomms14049; @url:https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/cell-ranger/latest], due to its popularity.
Thus, selecting a tool with comparable results to Cell Ranger was also desirable.
In comparing `alevin-fry` [@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01408-3] to Cell Ranger, we found `alevin-fry` had a lower run time and memory usage (Figure {@fig:figS1}A), while retaining comparable mean gene expression for all genes (Figure {@fig:figS1}B), total UMIs per cell (Figure {@fig:figS1}C), and total genes detected per cell (Figure {@fig:figS1}D).
(All analyses comparing gene expression quantification tools are available in a public analysis repository: <https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/alsf-scpca>.)
Based on these results, we elected to use `salmon alevin` and `alevin-fry` [@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01408-3] in `scpca-nf` to quantify gene expression data.

Taking FASTQ files as input, `scpca-nf` aligns reads using the selective alignment option in `salmon alevin` to an index with transcripts corresponding to spliced cDNA and intronic regions, denoted by `alevin-fry` as a `splici` index (Figure {@fig:fig2}A).
The output from `alevin-fry` includes a gene-by-cell count matrix for all barcodes identified, even those that may not contain true cells.

`scpca-nf` performs filtering of empty droplets, removal of low-quality cells, normalization, dimensionality reduction, and cell type annotation (Figure {@fig:fig2}A).
The unfiltered gene-by-cell counts matrices are filtered to remove any barcodes that are not likely to contain cells using `DropletUtils::emptyDropsCellRanger()`[@doi:10.1186/s13059-019-1662-y].
Low-quality cells are identified and removed with `miQC` [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009290], which jointly models the proportion of mitochondrial reads and detected genes per cell and calculates a probability that each cell is compromised.
The remaining cells' counts are normalized [@doi:10.1186/s13059-016-0947-7], and reduced-dimension representations are calculated using both principal component analysis (PCA) and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) [@arxiv:1802.03426].
Finally, cell types are classified using two automated methods, `SingleR` [@doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y] and `CellAssign` [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0529-1], and an ontology-aware consensus cell type is derived from these automated labels where possible.

To make downloading from the Portal convenient for R and Python users, downloads are available as either `SingleCellExperiment` or `AnnData`[@doi:10.1101/2021.12.16.473007] objects.
The workflow outputs a `SingleCellExperiment` object (saved as an `.rds` file) containing the fully processed results, including the dimension reduction results and cell type annotations, as well as objects containing the unfiltered and the empty droplet filtered gene-by-cell matrices.
`scpca-nf` also converts all `SingleCellExperiment` objects to `AnnData` objects, which are saved as `.h5ad` files (Figure {@fig:fig2}A).
Downloads contain the unfiltered, filtered, and processed objects from `scpca-nf` to allow users to choose to perform their own filtering and normalization or to start their analysis from a processed object.

All downloads from the Portal include a quality control (QC) report with a summary of processing information (e.g., `alevin-fry` version), library statistics (e.g., the total number of cells), and a collection of diagnostic plots for each library (Figure {@fig:fig2}B-G).
A knee plot displaying total UMI counts for all droplets (i.e., including empty droplets) indicates the effects of the empty droplet filtering (Figure {@fig:fig2}B).
For each cell that remains after filtering empty droplets, the number of total UMIs, genes detected, and mitochondrial reads are calculated and summarized in a scatter plot (Figure {@fig:fig2}C).
We include plots showing the `miQC` model and which cells are kept and removed after filtering with `miQC` (Figure {@fig:fig2}D-E).
A UMAP plot with cells colored by the total number of genes detected and a faceted UMAP plot where cells are colored by the expression of a set of highly variable genes are also provided (Figure {@fig:fig2}F-G).

## Processing samples with additional modalities

`scpca-nf` includes modules for processing samples with sequencing modalities beyond single-cell or single-nuclei RNA-seq data: corresponding ADT or CITE-seq data [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4380], multiplexed data via cell hashing [@doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1603-1], spatial transcriptomics, or bulk RNA-seq.

### Antibody-derived tags

To process ADT libraries, the ADT FASTQ files are quantified using `salmon alevin` and `alevin-fry` (Figure {@fig:figS2}A).
Along with the FASTQ files, `scpca-nf` takes a tab-separated values (TSV) file with one row for each ADT – containing the name used for the ADT and associated barcode – required to build an ADT-specific index for quantifying ADT expression with `alevin-fry`.
The output from `alevin-fry` is the unfiltered ADT-by-cell counts matrix.
The ADT-by-cell counts matrix is read into R alongside the gene-by-cell counts matrix and saved as an alternative experiment (`altExp`) within the main `SingleCellExperiment` object containing the unfiltered RNA counts.

Any cells removed after filtering empty droplets based on the unfiltered RNA counts matrix are also removed from the ADT counts matrix.
`scpca-nf` does not filter any cells based on ADT expression or remove cells with low-quality ADT expression.
Instead, the workflow calculates QC statistics for ADT counts using `DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()` and stores them alongside the ADT-by-cell counts matrix in the filtered `SingleCellExperiment` object.
Users can use these statistics to filter based on ADT counts before proceeding to downstream analyses if they choose.

The ADT-by-cell counts matrix is normalized first by determining the ambient profile and then using that profile to calculate median size factors with `scuttle::computeMedianFactors()` [@doi:10.18129/B9.bioc.scuttle; @url:https://bioconductor.org/books/3.16/OSCA.advanced/integrating-with-protein-abundance.html#cite-seq-median-norm].
We skip normalization for cells with low-quality ADT expression, as indicated by `DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()`.
Although `scpca-nf` normalizes ADT counts, the workflow does not perform any dimensionality reduction of ADT data; only the RNA counts data are used as input for dimensionality reduction.
The normalized ADT data are saved as an `altExp` within the processed `SingleCellExperiment` containing the normalized RNA data.
During conversion to `AnnData` objects, the modalities are exported as separate RNA (`_rna.h5ad`) and ADT (`_adt.h5ad`) objects.

If a library contains ADT data, the QC report will include an additional section with a summary of ADT-related statistics, such as how many cells express each ADT, and ADT-specific diagnostic plots (Figure {@fig:figS2}B-D).
As mentioned above, `scpca-nf` uses `DropletUtils::cleanTagCounts()` to calculate QC statistics for each cell using ADT expression but does not filter any cells from the object.
We include plots summarizing the potential effects of removing low-quality cells based on RNA and ADT counts in the QC report (Figure {@fig:figS2}B).
The first quadrant indicates which cells would be kept if the object was filtered using both RNA and ADT quality measures.
The other facets highlight which cells would be removed if filtering was done using only RNA counts, only ADT counts, or both.
The top four ADTs with the most variable expression are also identified and visualized using density plots to show the normalized ADT expression across all cells (Figure {@fig:figS2}C) and UMAPs – calculated from RNA expression data – with cells colored by ADT expression (Figure {@fig:figS2}D).

### Multiplexed libraries

To process multiplexed libraries, the HTO FASTQ files are quantified using `salmon alevin` and `alevin-fry` (Figure {@fig:figS2}C).
Along with the FASTQ files, `scpca-nf` requires two TSV files to process multiplexed data: one to build an HTO-specific index for quantifying HTO expression with `alevin-fry`, and a second to indicate which HTO was used for which sample when multiplexing the library.
The unfiltered HTO-by-cell counts matrix output from `alevin-fry` is saved as an alternative experiment (`altExp`) within the main `SingleCellExperiment` containing the unfiltered RNA counts.

As with ADT data, `scpca-nf` does not filter any cells based on HTO expression, and any cells removed after filtering empty droplets based on the unfiltered RNA counts matrix are also removed from the HTO counts matrix in the filtered object.
`scpca-nf` does not perform any additional filtering or processing of the HTO-by-cell counts matrix, so the same filtered matrix is included in the processed object.

Although `scpca-nf` quantifies the HTO data and includes an HTO-by-cell counts matrix in all objects, `scpca-nf` does not demultiplex the samples into one sample per library.
Instead, `scpca-nf` applies multiple demultiplexing methods, including demultiplexing with `DropletUtils::hashedDrops()` [@doi:10.18129/B9.bioc.DropletUtils], demultiplexing with `Seurat::HTODemux()` [@doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1603-1], and genetic demultiplexing when bulk RNA-seq data are available.
`scpca-nf` uses the genetic demultiplexing method described in Weber et al. [@doi:10.1093/gigascience/giab062], which uses bulk RNA-seq as a reference for the expected genotypes found in each single-cell RNA-seq sample.
The results from all available demultiplexing methods are saved in the filtered and processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects.

If a library has associated HTO data, an additional section is included in the `scpca-nf` QC report.
This section summarizes HTO-specific library statistics, such as how many cells express each HTO.
No additional plots are produced, but a table summarizing the results from all three demultiplexing methods is included.

### Bulk and spatial transcriptomics

Some samples also include data from bulk RNA-seq and/or spatial transcriptomics libraries.
Both of these additional sequencing methods are supported by `scpca-nf`.
To quantify bulk RNA-seq data, `scpca-nf` takes bulk FASTQ files as input, trims reads using `fastp` [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty560], and then aligns and quantifies reads with `salmon` (Figure {@fig:figS3}A) [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4197].
The output is a single TSV file with the gene-by-sample counts matrix for all samples in a given ScPCA project.
This gene-by-sample matrix is only included with project downloads on the Portal.

To quantify spatial transcriptomics data, `scpca-nf` takes the RNA FASTQ and slide image as input (Figure {@fig:figS3}B).
As `alevin-fry` does not yet fully support spatial transcriptomics data, `scpca-nf` uses Space Ranger to quantify all spatial transcriptomics data [@url:https://www.10xgenomics.com/support/software/space-ranger/latest].
The output includes the spot-by-gene matrix along with a summary report produced by Space Ranger.

## Downloading projects from the ScPCA Portal

<!-- TODO:
⚠️ JNT thinks this level of repetition of facts covered in earlier sections is good.
See what you think during your review.
JAS: I think it is fine,but I also think it could easily be cut if needed for length.
-->
On the Portal, users can either download data from individual samples or all data from an entire ScPCA project.
When downloading data for an entire project, users can choose between receiving the individual files for each sample (default) or one file containing the gene expression data and metadata for all samples in the project as a merged object.
Users also have the option to choose their desired format and receive the data as `SingleCellExperiment` (`.rds`) or `AnnData` (`.h5ad`) objects.

For downloads with samples as individual files, the download folder will include a sub-folder for each sample in the project (Figure {@fig:fig3}A).
Each sample folder contains all three object types (unfiltered, filtered, and processed) in the requested file format and the QC and cell type summary report for all libraries from the given sample.
The objects house the summarized gene expression data and associated metadata for the library indicated in the filename.

All project downloads include a metadata file, `single_cell_metadata.tsv`, containing relevant metadata for all samples, and a `README.md` with information about the contents of each download, contact and citation information, and terms of use for data downloaded from the Portal (Figure {@fig:fig3}A-B).
If the ScPCA project includes samples with bulk RNA-seq, two additional files are included: a gene-by-sample counts matrix (`_bulk_quant.tsv`) with the quantified gene expression data for all samples in the project, and a metadata file (`_bulk_metadata.tsv`).

### Merged objects

Providing data for all samples within a single file facilitates performing joint gene-level analyses, such as differential expression or gene set enrichment analyses, on multiple samples simultaneously.
Therefore, we provide a single, merged object for each project containing all raw and normalized gene expression data and metadata for all single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq libraries within a given ScPCA project.
We provide merged objects for all projects in the Portal except for those with multiplexing, due to potential ambiguity in identifying samples across multiplexed libraries.
No further processing besides merging the object is performed; batch-correction is not performed, and integrated data is not provided.
If downloading data from an ScPCA project as a single, merged file, the download will include a single `.rds` or `.h5ad` file, a summary report for the merged object, and a folder with all individual QC and cell type reports for each library found in the merged object (Figure {@fig:fig3}B).

To build the merged objects, we created an additional stand-alone workflow for merging the output from `scpca-nf`, `merge.nf` (Figure {@fig:fig3}C).
`merge.nf` takes as input the processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects output by `scpca-nf` for all single-cell and single-nuclei libraries included in a given ScPCA project.
The gene expression data stored in all `SingleCellExperiment` objects are then merged to produce a single merged gene-by-cell counts matrix containing all cells from all libraries.
No batch correction is performed when creating the merged object.
Where possible, library-, cell- and gene-specific metadata found in the individual processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects are also merged.
The merged normalized counts matrix is then used to select high-variance genes in a library-aware manner before performing dimensionality reduction with both PCA and UMAP.
`merge.nf` outputs the merged and processed object as a `SingleCellExperiment` object.
The more samples that are included in a merged object, the larger the object, and the more difficult it is to work with that object in R or Python.
Therefore, we do not provide merged objects for projects with more than 100 samples.

We also account for additional modalities in `merge.nf`.
If at least one library in a project contains ADT data, the raw and normalized ADT data are also merged and saved as an `altExp` in the merged `SingleCellExperiment` object.
If any libraries in a project are multiplexed, no merged object is created, as there is no guarantee that a unique HTO was used for each sample in a given project.
All merged `SingleCellExperiment` objects are converted to `AnnData` objects and exported as `.h5ad` files.
If the merged object contains an `altExp` with merged ADT data, two `AnnData` objects are exported to create separate RNA (`_rna.h5ad`) and ADT (`_adt.h5ad`) objects.

`merge.nf` outputs a summary report for each merged object, which includes a set of tables summarizing the types of samples and libraries included in the project, such as types of diagnosis, and a faceted UMAP showing all cells from all libraries.
Figure {@fig:fig3}D shows an example of this plot with a subset of libraries from an ScPCA project.

## Annotating cell types

Assigning cell type labels to single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq data is often an essential step in analysis.
Cell type annotation requires knowledge of the expected cell types in a dataset and associated gene expression patterns for each cell type, which may be available in other public databases or individual publications.
Automated cell type annotation methods leveraging public databases are an excellent initial step in the labeling process, as they can be applied consistently and transparently across all samples in a data set.
As such, we include cell type annotations determined using two different automated methods, `SingleR` [@doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y] and `CellAssign` [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0529-1], in all processed `SingleCellExperiment` and `AnnData` objects available for download on the Portal, saving users analysis time.

Annotating cell types with automated methods like `SingleR` and `CellAssign` requires the use of previously annotated reference data.
For `SingleR`, this can be in the form of an annotated gene expression dataset from a microarray, bulk RNA-seq, or single-cell RNA-seq experiment.
`CellAssign` requires a matrix of cell types and expected marker genes.
Most public annotated reference datasets that can be used with these methods – including those we use for the Portal – are derived from normal tissue, making accurately annotating tumor datasets particularly difficult.
Comparing the two methods and observing consistent cell type annotations across methods can indicate higher confidence in the provided labels, so we created a set of ontology-aware rules to assign consensus cell type labels based on the agreement between `SingleR` and `CellAssign`.
These consensus cell type assignments can be found in all processed `SingleCellExperiment` and `AnnData` objects on the Portal.

For some ScPCA projects, submitters provided their own curated cell type annotations, including annotation of tumor cells and disease-specific cell states.
These submitter-provided annotations can be found in all `SingleCellExperiment` and `AnnData` objects (unfiltered, filtered, and processed).

### Choosing cell typing references

`SingleR` is a reference-based annotation method that requires an existing bulk or single-cell RNA-seq dataset with annotations.
To identify an appropriate reference to use with `SingleR`, we annotated a small number of samples across multiple disease types with all human-specific references available in the `celldex` package [@doi:10.1038/s41590-018-0276-y].
The output from `SingleR` includes a score matrix containing a score for each cell and all possible cell types found in the reference, where higher scores are associated with assigned cell types.
We calculated the delta median statistic for each cell in the dataset by subtracting the median score from the score associated with the assigned cell type label.
The delta median statistic helps evaluate how confident `SingleR` is in assigning each cell to a specific cell type, where low delta median values indicate ambiguous assignments and high delta median values indicate confident assignments [@url:https://bioconductor.org/books/release/SingleRBook/annotation-diagnostics.html#based-on-the-deltas-across-cells].
<!-- TODO: ⚠️ For review - What do you think of the next sentence? -->
This measure showed that the `BlueprintEncodeData` reference [@doi:10.3324/haematol.2013.094243; @doi:10.1038/nature11247], which includes a variety of normal cell types, performed similarly to or better than other references when applied to samples from a variety of diagnoses (Figure {@fig:figS4}).
Based on these findings, we used the `BlueprintEncodeData` reference to annotate cells from all libraries on the Portal.
Use of a consistent reference also supports cross-project analyses.

In contrast, `CellAssign` is a marker-gene-based annotation method that requires a binary matrix with all cell types and all associated marker genes as the reference.
We used the list of marker genes available as part of `PanglaoDB` [@doi:10.1093/database/baz046] to construct organ-specific marker gene matrices with marker genes from all cell types listed for the specified organ.
Since many cancers may have infiltrating immune cells, all immune cells were also included in each organ-specific reference.
For each ScPCA project, we used the organ-specific marker gene matrix that most closely matched the tissue type from which the sample was obtained (e.g., for brain tumors, we used a brain-specific marker gene matrix with all brain and immune cell types).
If `CellAssign` cannot find a likely cell type from the marker gene matrix, it does not assign a cell type.
Because we annotate cells from tumor samples using references containing only normal cells, we anticipate that many cells, particularly the tumor cells, will not have a sutiable cell type match in the reference.
Indeed, when applying `CellAssign` to tumor samples with our chosen reference, we observed that many cells were unassigned.
We included an example in Figure {@fig:figS5}A where unassigned cell types are labeled with `Unknown`.
When comparing annotations obtained from `CellAssign` and `SingleR` annotations to submitter-provided annotations, we noticed the labels for non-tumor cells were similar between `CellAssign`, `SingleR`, and submitter annotations, while the tumor cells were not assigned using `CellAssign` (Figure {@fig:figS5}B).

### Adding cell type annotations to the ScPCA Portal

`scpca-nf` adds cell type annotations from `SingleR` and `CellAssign` to all processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects (Figure {@fig:fig4}A).
This requires two additional reference files as input to the workflow: a classification model built from a reference dataset for `SingleR` and a marker gene matrix for `CellAssign`.
`SingleR::trainSingleR()` was used to build a classification model from the provided `BlueprintEncodeData` dataset and create the required `SingleR` input for `scpca-nf`.
The classification model and processed `SingleCellExperiment` were input to `SingleR::classifySingleR()`, resulting in annotations for all cells and an associated matrix with per-cell scores for all possible cell type labels.
The `SingleR` score matrix and the assigned cell types are added to each processed object output by `scpca-nf`.
Simultaneously, processed `SingleCellExperiment` objects are converted to `AnnData` objects for classification with `CellAssign`.
`CellAssign` uses the converted `AnnData` object and the marker gene matrix to train a model and predict the most likely cell type from the possible cell types in the marker gene matrix.
The `CellAssign` prediction matrix, which contains a probability that each cell is one of each possible cell types, and the assigned cell types are added to the processed objects output by `scpca-nf`.

An additional cell type report with information about reference sources, comparisons among cell type annotation methods, and diagnostic plots is also output by `scpca-nf`.
Tables summarizing the number of cells assigned to each cell type for each method are shown alongside UMAPs coloring cells by the assigned cell type.
The concordance of cell type annotations assigned between both methods can indicate higher confidence in the provided annotations.
We therefore used the Jaccard similarity index to compare annotations between the two methods, as well as submitter-provided annotations, if available.
This index is calculated between pairs of cell type labels from each method and ranges from 0-1, where values close to 1 indicate high agreement and a high proportion of overlapping cells and values close to 0 indicate a low proportion of overlapping cells.
The Jaccard similarity index is displayed in a heatmap, an example of which is shown in Figure {@fig:fig4}B.

The report also includes a diagnostic plot evaluating the confidence of cell type annotations determined by each method.
To evaluate confidence in `SingleR` cell type annotations, the delta median statistic is calculated by subtracting the median score from the score associated with the assigned cell type label [@url:https://bioconductor.org/books/release/SingleRBook/annotation-diagnostics.html#based-on-the-deltas-across-cells].
The distribution of delta median values for each cell type is shown in the cell type report, where a higher delta median statistic for a cell indicates higher confidence in the final cell type annotation.
`CellAssign` calculates the probability that each cell belongs to each possible cell type provided in the reference, and the cell type label with the highest probability is assigned as the cell type for that cell.
<!-- TODO: What exactly do we mean by reliable labels? Labels that are appropriate for the dataset -->
These values range from 0 to 1, with larger values indicating greater confidence in a given cell type label, so we expect more confident labels to have most values close to 1.
A plot displaying the distribution of all probabilities for each cell type is included in the cell type report.

If the submitter provided cell types, the submitter annotations are compared to the annotations from both `SingleR` and `CellAssign`.
A summary of this comparison is included in the cell type report along with a table summarizing the submitter cell type annotations and a UMAP plot where each cell is colored by the submitter annotation.
The Jaccard similarity index is calculated for all pairs of cell type labels in submitter annotations and `SingleR` annotations and in submitter annotations and `CellAssign` annotations.
The results from both comparisons are displayed in a stacked heatmap available in the report, an example of which is shown in Figure {@fig:figS5}B.

### Assigning consensus cell types

`SingleR` and `CellAssign` use different references and distinct computational approaches to label cells.
We expect cells with the same or similar cell type labels using both methods will likely be more accurately annotated.
`scpca-nf` therefore assigns consensus cell type labels when the two automated methods agree.
To account for different levels of granularity in reference datasets, we employed an ontology-based approach to assign a consensus cell type label.
Specifically, the consensus cell type annotation is equivalent to the latest common ancestor (LCA) shared between the two predicted cell types.
To ensure specificity in the consensus labels, cells were only assigned a consensus cell type if the identified LCA had no more than 170 descendant terms, with a few exceptions (see Materials and Methods for more details).
This threshold was chosen to exclude overly general cell ontology terms, such as lymphocyte, while retaining meaningful classifications like T cell and B cell.
After assigning all consensus cell types, we looked at the expression of cell-type specific marker genes across all cells to validate the assignments (Figure {@fig:fig5}A, Figure {@fig:figS6}).

The consensus cell type labels provide harmonized cell type annotations for all samples in the ScPCA Portal, facilitating downstream analyses across multiple samples.
Consensus annotations can be particularly useful when examining samples from multiple projects submitted by different investigators.
The availability of uniformly processed gene expression data with provided consensus annotations supports analyzing and drawing conclusions across a large set of samples.
For example, we show the distribution of cell types observed in all high-grade and low-grade glioma samples in Figure {@fig:fig5}B, which originate from six different projects and four different investigators.
Here, we can identify similar cell types across all glioma samples, but the composition of cell types present in each sample is heterogeneous.

Previous studies have characterized the glioma immune microenvironment as being predominantly composed of myeloid cells, including microglia and glioma-associated macrophages, with smaller proportions of lymphocytes such as T cells [@doi:10.1038/s41698-024-00717-4; @doi:10.1093/noajnl/vdad009].
Focusing on the immune infiltrate in glioma samples reveals that most immune cells in ScPCA samples are classified as either myeloid or T cell types.
However, there is notable heterogeneity even within HGG and LGG subtypes (Figure {@fig:fig5}C).
A summary of all the consensus cell types observed in all other ScPCA samples can be found in Figure {@fig:figS7}.


## Analysis of bulk RNA-seq

Several projects in the ScPCA Portal contain bulk RNA-seq data in addition to single-cell/nuclei RNA-seq data.
Previous research has suggested that, compared to bulk RNA-seq, single-cell/nuclei RNA-seq technologies may fail to capture certain cell types [@doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0465-8], for example due to technical aspects of library preparation.
We therefore asked whether we could identify differences in biological signal between these two modalities that may suggest distinct cell type distributions.
For this analysis, we specifically focused on ScPCA projects with solid tumors, considered only non-multiplexed samples with both sequencing modalities, and excluded low-quality single-cell/nuclei libraries.
In total, we analyzed 97 samples across five projects: `SCPCP00001`, `SCPCP000002`, `SCPCP000006`, `SCPCP000009`, and `SCPCP000017`.
Projects `SCPCP000001` and `SCPCP000002` comprise high- and low-grade gliomas, respectively, and were sequenced at the bulk and single-cell levels, and `SCPCP000006`, `SCPCP000009`, and `SCPCP000017` comprise Wilms tumors, CNS tumors, and osteosarcomas, respectively, and were sequenced at the bulk and single-nuclei levels.
As described in Materials and Methods, we derived pseudobulk expression matrices for each single-cell/nuclei library, and we compared their expression to bulk using a series of linear models (one per ScPCA project) predicting bulk from pseudobulk expression with a random effect controlling for sample (Figure {@fig:fig6}A, Figure {@fig:figS8}A).
Across all projects, we observed a positive relationship between bulk and pseudobulk expression, consistent with our expectations.

We next performed an overrepresentation analysis to probe for differences in gene expression that might suggest differences in cell type composition and/or abundance between modalities.
To this end, we calculated the per-gene median of each project's model residuals and identified outliers, where "positive outliers" are genes with higher bulk RNA-seq expression than expected from pseudobulk expression, and conversely "negative outliers" are genes with lower bulk RNA-seq expression than expected from pseudobulk expression.
Using marker gene sets associated with consensus cell types, we calculated the odds ratio in each direction as the odds a cell type marker gene is present in the given outlier direction compared to other genes.
Following permutation testing and P-value correction to control the FDR at 5\%, we indeed found that several cell type marker gene sets had higher, but never lower, bulk RNA-seq expression than expected (Figure {@fig:fig6}B, Figure {@fig:figS8}B).

In brain and CNS tumors, the marker genes overrepresented in bulk RNA-seq expression corresponded nearly exclusively to stromal (e.g., endothelial and extracellular matrix secreting cells) and/or neuronal cell types (e.g., glial cells and astrocytes), all of which are known to be prevalent non-immune cells in glioma tumor microenvironments [@doi:10.3389/fimmu.2023.1227126; @doi:10.3389/fphar.2024.1355242] (Figure {@fig:fig6}B).
The only exceptions were monocyte marker genes being overrepresented in bulk RNA-seq expression for `SCPCP000009` (brain and CNS tumors), which was sequenced at the single-nuclei level while projects `SCPCP000001` (high-grade gliomas) and `SCPCP000002` (low-grade gliomas) were sequenced at the single-cell level.
This difference may reflect that single-cell approaches have increased sensitivity to detect immune cells relative to single-nuclei approaches [@doi:10.4132/jptm.2022.12.19].

Given that our consensus cell type analysis identified a variety of immune cells from high- and low-grade gliomas (Figure {@fig:fig5}), these results suggest that non-immune cells may have been lost during single-cell library preparation.
Indeed, several of these overrepresented bulk cell types for `SCPCP000001` and `SCPCP000002` were not among the single-cell consensus cell types themselves (`SCPCP000001`: "blood vessel endothelial cell", "extracellular matrix secreting cell", "glial cell", "pericyte"; `SCPCP000002`: "blood vessel endothelial cell", "extracellular matrix secreting cell", "microvascular endothelial cell"), further emphasizing the potential loss of these cell types in the single-cell data.
By contrast, we uncovered a variety of both immune and non-immune cell types overrepresented in bulk RNA-seq `SCPCP000017` (osteosarcoma; Figure {@fig:figS8}B), which may reflect inherent challenges in dissociating bone tissue [@doi:10.1186/s12885-023-10977-1].
Taken together, these results show that, while bulk and single-cell/nuclei expression is indeed highly correlated, cell type differences may still be present between modalities, potentially driven by cell-type-specific loss in single-cell experiments.
